# Encrypt a Table

This lab will guide you through the process of encrypting several columns within a SQL Server table, using the Always Encrypted functionality. 

Start by pressing `CTRL+N` to open a new query window for this lab in SSMS.

## Create the Database

First we'll create a new database for this lab. Run the following code to create and use `MyEncryptedDb`:

```sql
CREATE DATABASE MyEncryptedDB
GO

USE MyEncryptedDB
```

Now right-click on the Database folder in the Object Explorer and select Refresh to show the new database in the tree view.

## Create the Employee Table and Populate it with Data

Now create and populate a new `Employee` table:

```sql
CREATE TABLE Employee(
    EmployeeId  int IDENTITY PRIMARY KEY,
    Name        varchar(20),
    SSN         varchar(20),
    Salary      money,
    City        varchar(20)
)

INSERT INTO Employee
 (Name,             SSN,            Salary,    City) VALUES
 ('James Miller',   '123-45-6789',  61692,    'New York'),      --  Same salary as Greg Stevens
 ('Doug Nichols',   '987-65-4321',  59415,    'Boston'),
 ('Richard Jones',  '346-90-5513',  50698,    'Chicago'),
 ('Joe Anonymous',  'n/a',          54036,    'Los Angeles'),   --  Same SSN as Jane Anonymous
 ('Jane Anonymous', 'n/a',          48909,    'Orlando'),       --  Same SSN as Joe Anonymous
 ('Greg Stevens',   '555-43-7801',  61692,    'Seattle')        --  Same salary as James Miller

SELECT * FROM Employee
```

This table stores information about employees, including their names, social security numbers (SSNs), salaries, and city of residence. Of course, nothing is encrypted yet, and all the data is visible in plain text.

In our scenario, the `SSN` and `Salary` columns contain sensitive data that should be protected. So we'll use the Always Encrypted feature to encrypt these columns, ensuring that the sensitive information they contain is secure.

## Encrypt Data with the Always Encrypted Wizard

Let's use the Always Encrypted Wizard in SSMS to encrypt the `SSN` and `Salary` columns. The wizard will assist in creating the encryption keys and migrating the existing data in the `Employee` table, encrypting the `SSN` and `Salary` in the process. Remember, only the client (SSMS in this case) can encrypt the data, so the migration requires round-tripping each row from the server to the client for encryption, and then back to the server where it is then stored back into the table.

### Understanding Encryption Choices and Configurations

- **Column Encryption Keys (CEKs) and Column Master Keys (CMKs):** Always Encrypted utilizes two types of keys. The Column Encryption Key (CEK) is the "data-encrypting key" that's used to directly encrypt data in the database, while the Column Master Key (CMK) is the "key-encrypting key" that encrypts the CEKs. For simplicity in our demonstration, we will use one CEK for both columns, though in practice, each column could have its own CEK. There is only one CMK, which will be created and stored in the certificate store on the client machine. The client-side path to CMK (not the CMK itself), as well as the CEKs encrypted by the CMK (not the decrypted CEKs themselves) are all stored in the database. Clients can consume this metadata to locate the CMK, use it to decrypt the CEKs, and thus perform cryptography operations (encryption and decryption) to access protected data.

- **Encryption Types:** Two encryption types are supported: randomized and deterministic. Randomized encryption is more secure, because it will always generate a different encrypted representation of the same data every time, and so it cannot be queried. Deterministic encryption is less secure, because it will always generate the same encrypted representation of the same data every time. This makes it easier for attackers to infer information about the encrypted data, but it also makes it possible for us to query on it. We will want to be able to query on the `SSN` column, so that column will use deterministic encryption, which has a predictable encryption pattern. Since we won't need to query on the `Salary` column, it will use randomized encryption since that's more secure than deterministic encryption. 

- **Storage and Management of Keys:** The CMK can be stored in either the certificate store or Azure Key Vault. Using Azure Key Vault is more complex to configure, but ultimately simplifies key management in the real world by providing a centralized location for the CMK, which is then accessible only to authorized clients via the key vault's access policy. Going with the certificate store requires no extra configuration, but does add the maintenance burden of distributing and importing the CMK into certificate store of every authorized client. To keep this demo simple and maintain our focus on Always Encrypted, we're going to use the certificate store. Note that because we are running both client and server components on the same machine in our lab environment, the certificate will be stored on the same machine as SQL Server. It's crucial to understand that this setup contradicts the fundamental principle of Always Encrypted, where the CMK should never be available to the database server, and client-side encryption is always enforced.

Before running the wizard, open the user certificate store on your computer by clicking Start, typing "cert", and choosing Manager User Certificates. Then navigate to **Personal > Certificates** to open the Certificate Manager, and scroll through the list of installed certificates (they are sorted alphabetically). Notice how there is no certificate that starts with the name "Always Encrypted." We will now use the wizard to create a new certificate here, and store its metadata in the database. Remember, we only have the certificate installed on the database server to simplify the exercise (we're using the same machine for the client and the server). This should normally never be done in real-world scenarios where only the client can access the certificate.

### Run the Wizard

1. In the Object Explorer, right-click on `MyEncryptedDB` and select **Tasks** > **Encrypt Columns** to launch the Always Encrypted Wizard.

2. Click Next to advance past the Introduction page.

3. On the Column Selection page, select the `SSN` and `Salary` columns for encryption. For the encryption type, choose Randomized on the `Salary` column. In order to allow queries on the encrypted social security numbers, choose Deterministic for the `SSN` column. Notice that the wizard shows that one CEK named CEK_Auto1 will be created and used to encrypted both columns. Click Next to advance to the Master Key Configuration page.

4. On the Master Key Configuration page, notice that the only available option in the master key selection dropdown is to auto-generate a new CMK. This is because we haven't yet generated the CMK. **If an `Allow enclave computations` checkbox appears beneath the dropdown, be sure that it is not selected (we will explore secure enclaves in a later lab).** For the key store provider option, stick with the default Windows Certificate Store option to create the master key in the Current User certificate store. Click Next to advance to the In-Place Encryption Settings page.

5. Older versions of SSMS don't include the In-Place Encryption Settings page. This feature utilizes secure enclaves, an advanced feature that you'll learn about in a later lab. So just click Next to advance to the Run Settings page.

6. On the Run Settings page, you have the option to generate a PowerShell script to run the process later, or proceed to run it now. Leave the default setting 'Proceed to finish now' and click Next.

7. Review your selections on the Summary page. Notice that a new master key named CMK_Auto1 will be created in the database. This refers to the CMK metadata, which is the client-side certificate store path to the CMK, and not the CMK itself. You can see that a new column encryption key named CEK_Auto1 will also be created in the database. This refers to the CEK stored in the database after it has been encrypted by the CMK, and not the actual CEK itself. Finally, note that the two columns `SSN` and `Salary` will be encrypted by the CEK, using deterministic encryption for the `SSN` column and randomized encryption for the `Salary` column.

8. Click Finish to being the encryption process. Even with this small amount of data, the wizard can take a while to encrypt the `Employee` table.
 
When the wizard completes, click Close. Return to the Certificate Manager, right-click the Certificates folder and select Refresh. Scroll down the list again and notice that there is now a certificate named "Always Encrypted Auto Certificate1."

Leave the Certificate Manager window open for the next lab. Now return to SSMS and query from the table:

```sql
SELECT * FROM Employee
```

Observe that the `SSN` and `Salary` columns are not revealed, and appear encrypted instead. Also notice that Joe Anonymous and Jane Anonymous have identical encrypted representations for the same `SSN` value "n/a", because that column uses deterministic encryption. However, you can see that James Miller and Greg Stevens each have different encrypted representations for the same `Salary` value "61692", because that column uses randomized encryption. Therefore, we'll be able to run equality queries on the `SSN` column, but not on the `Salary` column.

## Examine the Revised Table Schema

Now that these columns are encrypted, let's see how their metadata is defined in the `Employee` table definition.

**Instructions:**

1. **Generate the Table Script:**
   - In the Object Explorer, expand the `MyEncryptedDB` database and then expand the "Tables" folder.
   - Right-click on the `Employee` table, select "Script Table as" > "CREATE To" > "New Query Editor Window". This action generates the T-SQL script used to create the `Employee` table, including the definitions for the encrypted columns.

2. **Observing Data Types and ENCRYPTED WITH Syntax:**
   - In the generated script, note that the data types for the `SSN` and `Salary` columns remain as `varchar(20)` and `money` respectively, just like their original definitions. This detail is significant, highlighting that Always Encrypted treats these columns as logically holding `varchar` and `money` data, despite physically storing encrypted binary data that can exceed the length of these defined types.
   - Additionally, you'll observe the `ENCRYPTED WITH` clause for each column, specifying the encryption type and referencing a Column Encryption Key (CEK), likely named `CEK_Auto1`. The `Salary` column is specified to use randomized encryption, offering higher security by preventing the inference of encrypted values. Conversely, the `SSN` column employs deterministic encryption, enabling the possibility of exact-value searches but at a trade-off in security.

3. **Understanding the Importance of Collation:**
   - The script also defines the collation for the `SSN` column as `Latin_General_BIN2`. The `BIN2` suffix denotes a binary collation on string (varchar) data, crucial for the deterministic encryption used on the `SSN` column. This binary collation ensures that data comparisons are binary, and therefore case-sensitive. So even though this column can be queried, all searching on the `SSN` column will be case-sensitive, unlike the case-insensitive behavior of the default collation.

Now close the generated script window, and return to the query window we are using for this lab.

## Examine the Encryption Key Metadata

It's also essential to understand how SQL Server stores Always Encrypted metadata for encryption keys in the database. This is essentally the server-side metadata that drives client-side encryption using Always Encrypted.

In SSMS, the Object Explorer provides a graphical interface to view Always Encrypted keys under the **Security > Always Encrypted Keys** node of the `MyEncryptedDB` database. But we can also discover the server-side metadata using T-SQL queries:

```sql
-- Discover Always Encrypted keys
SELECT * FROM sys.column_master_keys
SELECT * FROM sys.column_encryption_keys
SELECT * FROM sys.column_encryption_key_values
```

**CMK Metadata:**
   - The results from `sys.column_master_keys` provide critical client-side details about the CMK. Notably, the `key_store_provider_name` column indicates `MSSQL_CERTIFICATE_STORE`, revealing that our CMK is stored in the local machine's certificate store. The `key_path` column specifies the exact location within the certificate store where the CMK resides, which will be the same path for all clients that you distribute the CMK certificate to.
   - If we were using Azure Key Value to store the CMK, the `key_store_provider_name` could be set to `AZURE_KEY_VAULT`, and the `key_path` would point to the URI of the CMK within Azure Key Vault, leveraging centralized key management and access control through Azure's cloud infrastructure.

**CEK Metadata:**
   - The metadata related to CEKs is divided between `sys.column_encryption_keys` and `sys.column_encryption_key_values`. The former table defines the name of the CEK, which is `CEK_Auto1` in this case, along with a unique `column_encryption_key_id`  that gets joined with the latter table, which also holds a foreign key the CMK used to decrypt the CMK, plus the `encrypted_value` column that holds the CEK, encrypted by the CMK.
   - This layered encryption model underscores that the CEK, stored in its encrypted form in the database, is unusable for encrypting or decrypting data without the appropriate CMK. Only authorized clients with access to the CMK can decrypt the CEK, enabling them to subsequently encrypt or decrypt column data.

By closely examining the metadata of both CMKs and CEKs, we gain a comprehensive understanding of the encryption architecture employed by Always Encrypted. This knowledge is critical for database administrators and developers to ensure proper key management and security practices.

Now let's join these tables together, along with `sys.columns`, in this next discovery query:

```sql
-- Discover columns protected by Always Encrypted
SELECT
    ColumnName      = c.name,
    DatabaseName    = ISNULL(c.column_encryption_key_database_name, DB_NAME()),
    EncryptionType  = encryption_type_desc,
    CekName         = cek.name,
    CekValue        = cekv.encrypted_value,
    CmkName         = cmk.name,
    CmkProviderType = cmk.key_store_provider_name,
    CmkPath         = cmk.key_path
FROM
    sys.columns AS c
    INNER JOIN sys.column_encryption_keys AS cek ON cek.column_encryption_key_id = c.column_encryption_key_id
    INNER JOIN sys.column_encryption_key_values AS cekv ON cekv.column_encryption_key_id = cek.column_encryption_key_id
    INNER JOIN sys.column_master_keys AS cmk ON cmk.column_master_key_id = cekv.column_master_key_id
WHERE
    c.column_encryption_key_id IS NOT NULL
```

The results show all the columns in all the databases that are using Always Encrypted, revealing the column name, database name, encryption type, CEK metadata, and CMK metadata.

## Enable Client Access to Encrypted Data

For a client application to access data protected by Always Encrypted in SQL Server, two requirements must be met. Understanding and implementing these requirements correctly is essential for working with encrypted data seamlessly.

**Requirements for Accessing Encrypted Data:**

1. **Access to the Column Master Key (CMK):** The client must have access to the CMK to decrypt the Column Encryption Key (CEK), which, in turn, can encrypt and decrypt your data. We are already meeting this requirement, because the CMK resides in our certificate store, where it was created by the Always Encrypted Wizard.

2. **Proper Configuration of the Connection String:** The client's connection string must include the parameter "column encryption setting=enabled". This inclusion signals SQL Server to automatically decrypt the data returned by queries, assuming the client has access to the CMK. Without this parameter, encrypted columns will not be decrypted, appearing as binary data to the client. We don't have this setting in the SSMS connection string yet, which is why we cannot see the encrypted columns in plain text in our previous query to select from the `Employee` table.

**Instructions to Modify the Connection String in SSMS:**

1. **Accessing the Connect Dialog:**
   - Right-click in the query window, and choose **Connection > Change Connection** to open the "Connect to Database Engine" dialog. Then click on the "Options >>" button to expand the dialog with additional options.

2. **Configuring Always Encrypted:**
   - While you could manually enter "column encryption setting=enabled" in the "Additional Connection Parameters" tab, there's a simpler way. Navigate to the "Always Encrypted" tab, and simply select the "Enable Always Encrypted" checkbox. This action instructs SSMS to automatically append "column encryption setting=enabled" to your connection string, streamlining the process. Leave the "Enable secure enclaves" checkbox unselected, as we'll explore secure enclaves in a later lab.
   
3. **Reconnecting to the Database:**
   - After clicking the "Connect" button with the "Enable Always Encrypted" option selected, SSMS will switch to the `master` database. To continue working with the `MyEncryptedDB` database, you need to switch back to it. Do this by selecting `MyEncryptedDB` from the database dropdown at the top of the query window.

Now that both requirements are met, we should be able to view the encrypted data. Run the query again:

```sql
SELECT * FROM Employee
```

At this point, SSMS will display the Parameterization for Always Encrypted dialog. Click Enable to enable the feature for this query window, which will be crucial later on when we attempt to insert and update encrypted data as well as querying for it.

Now observe how both encrypted columns are now visible in plain text. This is because the client (SSMS in this case) is able to use the CMK to decrypt the CEK, which is then used to decrypt the columns themselves.

## Query Encrypted Data with Deterministic Encryption

When working with Always Encrypted in SQL Server, querying encrypted columns requires an understanding of how encryption affects data retrieval. Let's explore this concept through the process of querying the `Employee` table for a specific Social Security Number (SSN).

**First Attempt: Direct Query**

Initially, you might attempt to query for employees with an SSN value of 'n/a' using a straightforward SQL command:

```sql
SELECT * FROM Employee WHERE SSN = 'n/a'
```

Executing this query by selecting the text and pressing F5 results in the query being sent directly to the server for execution. However, because 'n/a' is stored in the database using deterministic encryption, it needs to be encrypted client-side before the query is sent to the server. This direct approach does not allow for the client-side encryption of the 'n/a' value, leading to a failed query attempt.

**Requirements for Successful Encrypted Data Query:**

1. **Parameterization:** The query must be parameterized. This means instead of directly including the value in the query, you use a parameter that SQL Server can recognize as needing to be encrypted before the server-side query execution.

2. **ADO.NET Client Provider:** The query needs to be processed through the ADO.NET client provider, which supports Always Encrypted by automatically encrypting parameter values client-side. SQL Server Management Studio (SSMS) can handle this because we enabled Parameterization for Always Encrypted in the previous step.

**Second Attempt: Parameterized Query**

Let's retry the query with these considerations in mind:

```sql
DECLARE @SSN varchar(20) = 'n/a'
SELECT * FROM Employee WHERE SSN = @SSN
```

After adjusting the query to use a parameterized approach and executing it, you'll notice that it succeeds in returning the two matching records. This success is due to SSMS encrypting the value of `@SSN` client-side, matching the encrypted value stored in the database. Note, however, only exact matching on equality is supported with deterministic encryption. For example, you cannot perform a range query (such as greater than or less than), nor can you perform a wildcard query (using the `LIKE` operator) on the `SSN` column.

**Observing SqlParameter Use:**

When you parameterize your query in SSMS, you'll notice blue squiggly lines beneath the parameter declaration. Hovering the mouse cursor over these lines reveals that SSMS is using a `SqlParameter` under the hood, thanks to the enabled Parameterization for Always Encrypted. This visual cue is a helpful reminder that SSMS is handling the encryption requirements automatically.

**Case Sensitity:**

Now let's explore the impact of case sensitivity. Run the same query again, only supply the value in upper case as `N/A` rather than `n/a`:

```sql
DECLARE @SSN varchar(20) = 'N/A'
SELECT * FROM Employee WHERE SSN = @SSN
```

This query returns no matching results, because deterministic encryption uses a binary collation that is case-sensitive, and the value in the database is using lower case.

## Insert Encrypted Data

The requirements are the same when inserting new data into a table with columns protected by Always Encrypted. You must parameterize column values, and the ADO.NET client ensures that data which needs to be encrypted is encrypted before it's sent over the network to the SQL Server. This step will demonstrate the insertion of a new employee record into the `Employee` table, highlighting the encryption process.

Execute the following SQL command to insert a new employee record:

```sql
DECLARE @NewName varchar(20) = 'John Smith'
DECLARE @NewSSN varchar(20) = '246-80-1357'
DECLARE @NewSalary money = 52631
DECLARE @NewCity varchar(20) = 'Las Vegas'
INSERT INTO Employee VALUES
 (@NewName, @NewSSN, @NewSalary, @NewCity)
```

Always Encrypted understands which columns of the `Employee` table are being targeted by each parameter. And so the ADO.NET client provider automatically encrypts the data for the `SSN` and `Salary` columns client-side, based on the column encryption keys (CEKs) and the encryption type defined in the server-side metadata. This means that the social security number value '246-80-1357' is randomly encrypted and the salary value 52631 is deterministically encrypted *before* the `INSERT` statement is sent to SQL Server. The entire process is transparent, requiring no additional effort on your part.

The client-side provider uses the server-side metadata associated with each column to determine:
   - That '246-80-1357' needs to be encrypted using deterministic encryption for the `SSN` column, allowing for exact matches in queries.
   - That 52631 should be encrypted using randomized encryption for the `Salary` column.
   - That 'John Smith' and 'Los Angeles', stored in the `Name` and `City` columns respectively, do not require encryption as defined by the absence of encryption metadata for these column.

Now query the table again:

```sql
SELECT * FROM Employee
```
Observe the newly inserted row with `SSN` and `Salary` values that were encrypted client-side when we executed the `INSERT` statement, and decrypted client-side when executing this `SELECT` statement.

The next lab will continue working with the `Employee` table, so keep this query window open as you move on.

___

▶ [Lab: Always Encrypted Client Application](https://github.com/lennilobel/sql2022-workshop-hol/blob/main/HOL/3.%20Security%20Features/4.%20Always%20Encrypted/2.%20AE%20Client%20Application.md)
