# DATETRUNC Function

The `DATETRUNC` function in SQL Server enables truncation of date and time values to the specified part, such as year, month, day, etc. This is particularly useful for data analysis, enabling consistent date range comparisons.

## Truncating Date Values to Quarter and Year

```sql
DECLARE @d date = '2023-05-17'
SELECT
    @d AS FullDate,
    DATETRUNC(QUARTER, @d) AS TruncateToQuarter,
    DATETRUNC(YEAR, @d) AS TruncateToYear
```

This snippet truncates a given date to the first day of its quarter and year, respectively, illustrating how to use `DATETRUNC` for period-based data aggregation or filtering.

## Truncating DateTime Values to Hour and Day

```sql
DECLARE @dt datetime2 = '2023-05-17 02:04:23.1234567'
SELECT
    @dt AS FullDateTime,
    DATETRUNC(HOUR, @dt) AS TruncateToHour,
    DATETRUNC(DAY, @dt) AS TruncateToDay
```

Here, `DATETRUNC` is used to truncate a datetime value to the beginning of the specified hour and day, useful for when time-specific data granularity is needed.

## Comprehensive DateTime Truncation

```sql
DECLARE @dt datetime2 = '2023-05-17 11:30:15.1234567' -- Wednesday
SELECT 'FullDateTime',          @dt                          UNION ALL
SELECT 'TruncateToMicrosecond', DATETRUNC(MICROSECOND, @dt)  UNION ALL
SELECT 'TruncateToMillisecond', DATETRUNC(MILLISECOND, @dt)  UNION ALL
SELECT 'TruncateToSecond',      DATETRUNC(SECOND, @dt)       UNION ALL
SELECT 'TruncateToMinute',      DATETRUNC(MINUTE, @dt)       UNION ALL
SELECT 'TruncateToHour',        DATETRUNC(HOUR, @dt)         UNION ALL
SELECT 'TruncateToDay',         DATETRUNC(DAY, @dt)          UNION ALL
SELECT 'TruncateToDayOfYear',   DATETRUNC(DAYOFYEAR, @dt)    UNION ALL
SELECT 'TruncateToIsoWeek',     DATETRUNC(ISO_WEEK, @dt)     UNION ALL
SELECT 'TruncateToWeek',        DATETRUNC(WEEK, @dt)         UNION ALL
SELECT 'TruncateToMonth',       DATETRUNC(MONTH, @dt)        UNION ALL
SELECT 'TruncateToQuarter',     DATETRUNC(QUARTER, @dt)      UNION ALL
SELECT 'TruncateToYear',        DATETRUNC(YEAR, @dt)
```

This extensive example showcases the capability of `DATETRUNC` to truncate dates and times across a broad spectrum of components, from microseconds to years, highlighting its versatility in data processing and analysis tasks.

Also note that, in the context of weeks, the function provides two options: `ISO_WEEK` and `WEEK`. Here's the distinction between them:

- **TruncateToIsoWeek**: Using the `ISO_WEEK` parameter with `DATETRUNC` truncates the datetime to the start of the ISO week, which is always Monday.

- **TruncateToWeek**: The `WEEK` parameter, on the other hand, truncates the datetime to the start of the week based on the SQL Server's default setting, which is usually Sunday in the United States. However, this starting day of the week can be altered using the `SET DATEFIRST` statement.

This distinction is important for accurately performing weekly data analysis and ensuring that the week boundaries align with the intended standard or operational definition of a week.

## DATETRUNC and DATE_BUCKET Equivalence

Notably, `DATETRUNC` can achieve the same outcomes as `DATE_BUCKET` when the bucket size is set to one and the origin is January 1, 1900, effectively resetting smaller date parts to their initial values for the specified larger date part. This equivalence provides an intuitive way to align dates to the start of a given period, such as the beginning of a quarter or year, making it an essential tool for temporal data manipulation in SQL Server.
