# Introducing Ledger Tables

Ledger is a new feature in SQL Server 2022 designed to provide a secure and immutable record of database transactions, leveraging blockchain technology to enhance data integrity and auditability.

There are two types of ledger tables: append-only, which are intended for scenarios where data should be added but not modified or deleted; and updateable, which allow for more flexibility by permitting updates and deletions while still maintaining a comprehensive and immutable history of changes. In the next two labs, we'll explore both types, starting with append-only ledger tables to understand their immutable nature, followed by updateable ledger tables to see how SQL Server tracks and secures changes over time.

Start by pressing `CTRL+N` to open a new query window for this lab. You'll be learning how to work with ledger tables over the next two labs. So when you complete this lab, keep the query window open and continue to the next lab.

## Create the Sample Database

Let's set up our environment for working with ledger tables in SQL Server. The first step is to create a new database for our ledger table labs:

```sql
-- Create a new database for our ledger table labs
CREATE DATABASE LedgerDemo
GO

USE LedgerDemo
```

After creating the database, call the `sys.sp_generate_database_ledger_digest` stored procedure to generate the initial database ledger *digest*. At this initial stage, because the database is new and no transactions have been recorded yet, the digest will be `NULL`. This serves as our baseline; as transactions are executed, the digest will change, reflecting the ledger's tamper-evident nature by showing a JSON payload with the database digest block number and hash.

```sql
-- Generate the initial database ledger digest
-- At this point, since no transactions have occurred within the ledger-enabled database, 
-- the digest will be NULL, indicating no ledger-based changes or transactions have been recorded.
EXEC sys.sp_generate_database_ledger_digest
```

## Create an Append-Only Ledger Table

With the initial setup complete, we move to the next step in our hands-on lab, focusing on creating an append-only ledger table. This example uses a table named `KeyCardEvent` to record employee key card swipes, an action synonymous with entering or exiting a building. Given the table's purpose, it's structured to be append-only, reinforcing the idea that once a swipe event is recorded, it should remain unaltered; updates and deletions are not applicable to the nature of this data:

```sql
-- Create an append-only ledger table named KeyCardEvent
CREATE TABLE KeyCardEvent (
    EmployeeId int NOT NULL,
    Operation varchar(1024) NOT NULL,
    CreatedAt datetime2 NOT NULL
)
WITH (
    LEDGER = ON (
        APPEND_ONLY = ON
    )
)

-- Retrieve the database digest after the creation of the ledger table
-- This digest will now reflect the first transaction, indicating the immutable record 
-- of the table's creation within the database ledger.
EXEC sys.sp_generate_database_ledger_digest
```

The `CREATE TABLE` statement is enhanced with the `LEDGER = ON (APPEND_ONLY = ON)` option to enforce these constraints, turning our table into an append-only ledger table. This ensures the integrity and immutability of the event records.

Following the table's creation, we invoke the `sys.sp_generate_database_ledger_digest` stored procedure again to observe changes in the database digest. At this juncture, the database digest will reflect the first transaction - the creation of our ledger table. The digest output will include a block ID, starting at 0, and a hash value. This hash represents the current state of the database ledger, encapsulating all transactions up to this point, including our `CREATE TABLE` operation.

This demonstrates how SQL Server's ledger feature provides a verifiable and tamper-evident record of all database transactions. Each transaction alters the database digest, creating an audit trail that enhances data transparency and security.

## Populate the Append-Only Ledger Table

Now, we'll simulate the scenario of an employee swiping their badge to enter a building by inserting a row into our append-only ledger table. This first row records employee ID 43869 entering building 42 on June 2, 2022, at 6:55 PM. After inserting this event, we retrieve the database digest again. The database digest now reflects a block ID of 1, which indicates this is the second transaction (the first one being the creation of the table). Moreover, the updated hash value in the digest is derived from this transaction's hash combined with the hash of the previous block, thus implementing a blockchain structure for the database digest. 

Here's the code to perform the insertion and then retrieve the updated database digest:

```sql
INSERT INTO KeyCardEvent VALUES
 (43869, 'Building42', '2022-06-02T18:55:22')

EXEC sys.sp_generate_database_ledger_digest
```

When inserting multiple rows with a single `INSERT` statement into an append-only ledger table, SQL Server treats the entire operation as a single transaction. This behavior is reflected in the database's ledger digest, where a single block ID represents the transaction, not the individual row insertions. This ensures that the ledger maintains a consistent and tamper-evident record of transactions, providing an auditable history of changes. The block ID increases with each transaction, not with each row, emphasizing the transactional nature of ledger updates. Here's how you insert two rows with one statement and retrieve the updated digest, showing the transaction's blockchain nature:

```sql
INSERT INTO KeyCardEvent VALUES
 (43869, 'Building49', '2022-06-02T19:58:47'),
 (19557, 'Building97', '2022-06-02T20:01:56')

EXEC sys.sp_generate_database_ledger_digest
```


## Hidden Append-Only Ledger Table Columns

In SQL Server's append-only ledger tables, two hidden ledger columns, `ledger_start_transaction_id` and `ledger_start_sequence_number`, are automatically added to track transactional metadata. These columns are not visible when executing a standard `SELECT *` query, maintaining the simplicity of the table's schema for general use. However, these hidden columns can be explicitly queried to reveal the underlying ledger framework that supports the append-only integrity and auditability of the table. The `ledger_start_transaction_id` and `ledger_start_sequence_number` provide a detailed audit trail, offering insights into the transaction history of each row. Here's how you can query the table normally and then explicitly include the hidden ledger columns:

```sql
-- Appears as a standard table:
SELECT * FROM KeyCardEvent

-- Revealing hidden ledger columns:
SELECT
    *,
    ledger_start_transaction_id,
    ledger_start_sequence_number
FROM
    KeyCardEvent
```

In SQL Server's append-only ledger tables, the hidden columns for the transaction ID and sequence number provide essential details about the transactions that affected each row. Here's how they work:

- **Transaction ID:** This column uniquely identifies the transaction under which the row was inserted. It's crucial for tracing the row back to a specific point in the database's transaction history.

- **Sequence Number:** This column distinguishes between rows inserted by the same transaction. It's especially relevant for transactions that affect multiple rows.

For example, when the first row is inserted into a ledger table, it's recorded with a unique transaction ID and a sequence number of 0, indicating it's the first (and in this case, the only) row inserted by that transaction.

When another transaction inserts multiple rows—like two rows in our example—each row inserted by this transaction shares the same transaction ID, as they're part of the same transactional action. However, to differentiate between these rows, they are assigned incremental sequence numbers starting from 0. Therefore, the first row inserted by this transaction will have a sequence number of 0, and the second row will have a sequence number of 1.

This system allows SQL Server to maintain a detailed and orderly record of all changes made within a transaction, supporting data integrity and auditability by ensuring every individual row affected by a transaction is accounted for and distinguishable.

In SQL Server's ledger tables, while the default hidden columns for tracking transactional metadata are named `ledger_start_transaction_id` and `ledger_start_sequence_number`, you aren't stuck with these names. When creating an append-only ledger table, you have the option to specify custom names for these hidden columns. This customization is achieved by using the `TRANSACTION_ID_COLUMN_NAME` and `SEQUENCE_NUMBER_COLUMN_NAME` parameters within the `WITH LEDGER = ON` clause of the `CREATE TABLE` statement.

This feature allows for greater flexibility in adhering to your organization's naming conventions or in making the column names more descriptive and aligned with the table's context. By customizing these column names, you can ensure consistency across your database schema while benefiting from the robust auditing and data integrity features provided by SQL Server's ledger tables.




In SQL Server's ledger tables, the transaction ID and sequence number columns play a crucial role in tracking changes and ensuring data integrity. By default, these columns are hidden from the result set when executing a `SELECT *` query, due to the `HIDDEN` keyword being applied to them. This behavior is designed to keep the table's presentation clean and focused on the business data, while still maintaining a comprehensive audit trail under the hood.

However, SQL Server provides the flexibility to make these columns visible in your queries. If you prefer the transaction ID and sequence number columns to be directly accessible and not hidden, you can customize the table's creation script. When defining your ledger table, simply include the definitions for the transaction ID and sequence number columns without applying the `HIDDEN` keyword. This customization allows these columns to appear in the results of a `SELECT *` query, making it easier to directly access and analyze the audit trail data.

This capability to toggle the visibility of the transaction ID and sequence number columns provides developers and database administrators with the option to tailor the ledger table's behavior to their specific needs, whether that means keeping the audit trail discreetly in the background or making it a prominent part of the table's data.


## Querying `sys.database_ledger_transactions`

In SQL Server 2022's ledger database, the `sys.database_ledger_transactions` catalog view plays a crucial role in providing transparency and traceability for append-only ledger tables. This view stores a record for each transaction that occurs within the ledger database, encompassing both Data Definition Language (DDL) transactions, such as creating a table, and Data Manipulation Language (DML) transactions, like inserting rows.

Here's how you can view the transactions recorded in `sys.database_ledger_transactions`:

```sql
SELECT * FROM sys.database_ledger_transactions
```

The `transaction_id` found in the `KeyCardEvent` ledger table acts as a foreign key to the `sys.database_ledger_transactions` catalog view, establishing a direct link between table data and the transaction that affected it. Each entry in `sys.database_ledger_transactions` is a unique transaction, identified by a `transaction_id`, and it provides valuable details such as the timestamp (`commit_time`), the user responsible (`principal_name`), and a hash representing the transaction (`table_hashes`).


The code below joins the transaction catalog view with the `KeyCardEvent` table, showcasing the relationship between transactions and table data.

```sql
-- Join to view transactions with data
--  block 0 = no key card event rows
--  block 1 = one new key card event row (INSERT)
--  block 2 = two new key card event rows (INSERT)
SELECT
    lt.*,
    lv.*
FROM
    sys.database_ledger_transactions AS lt
    LEFT JOIN KeyCardEvent_Ledger AS lv ON lv.ledger_transaction_id = lt.transaction_id
ORDER BY
    lt.commit_time,
    lv.ledger_sequence_number
```

Through this query, we can observe how ledger tables provide an immutable, verifiable history of all data changes, thereby establishing a robust foundation for secure and transparent data management.








For instance, the first transaction in block 0 represents the `CREATE TABLE` operation, marking the ledger table's inception with a DDL transaction. Following this, block 1's transaction captures the first `INSERT` operation that adds a single row to the ledger table, classified as a DML transaction. The transaction in block 2, meanwhile, logs another `INSERT` operation that introduces two more rows to the table, again a DML action. Notably, even though the latter `INSERT` affects multiple rows, it's recorded as a single transaction, highlighting the system's efficiency in transaction management.

This catalog view also records each transaction's `commit_time` (the exact timestamp when the transaction was finalized), `principal_name` (identifying the user responsible for the transaction), and `table_hashes` (representing the specific hash generated for the transaction). These details further enrich the auditability and integrity of the ledger database, allowing for an exhaustive and transparent record of all database activities.









## Attempting Updates or Deletes on Append-Only Ledger Tables

Append-only ledger tables are designed to be immutable; once a row is inserted, it cannot be altered or removed. This design principle ensures that the data remains tamper-evident, providing a clear and reliable audit trail for sensitive or regulated information.

The following examples demonstrate what happens when you attempt to update or delete rows in an append-only ledger table named `KeyCardEvent`. These operations are intended to fail because such modifications are not allowed on append-only ledger tables, reinforcing the table's immutability and the integrity of its data.

```sql
-- Try to update rows in the table; fails for append-only ledger table
UPDATE KeyCardEvent
    SET EmployeeId = 34184
    WHERE EmployeeId = 43869
```

Attempting to update any row in this table results in an error because the ledger table is configured to be append-only. This means that once data is written, it is set in stone—figuratively speaking.

```sql
-- Try to delete rows in the table; fails for append-only ledger table
DELETE KeyCardEvent
    WHERE EmployeeId = 43869
```

Similarly, attempting to delete any row from the table will also result in an error. This restriction is a key feature of append-only ledger tables, ensuring that every transaction and event recorded in the table remains intact and unaltered, providing a trustworthy and comprehensive historical record.

These restrictions exemplify the robust data protection mechanisms inherent in SQL Server 2022's ledger tables. By preventing updates and deletions, append-only ledger tables serve as a solid foundation for scenarios requiring strong auditability and data integrity.
