# DATETRUNC Function

The `DATETRUNC` function in SQL Server enables truncation of date and time values to the specified part, such as year, month, day, etc. This is particularly useful for data analysis, enabling consistent date range comparisons.

## Truncating Date Values to Quarter and Year

Run the following code snippet:

```sql
DECLARE @d date = '2023-05-17'
SELECT
    @d AS FullDate,
    DATETRUNC(QUARTER, @d) AS TruncateToQuarter,
    DATETRUNC(YEAR, @d) AS TruncateToYear
```

This truncates a given date to the first day of its quarter and year, respectively, illustrating how to use `DATETRUNC` for period-based data aggregation or filtering.

## Truncating DateTime Values to Hour and Day

Now run this:

```sql
DECLARE @dt datetime2 = '2023-05-17T02:04:23.1234567'
SELECT
    @dt AS FullDateTime,
    DATETRUNC(HOUR, @dt) AS TruncateToHour,
    DATETRUNC(DAY, @dt) AS TruncateToDay
```

Here, `DATETRUNC` is used to truncate a datetime value to the beginning of the specified hour and day, useful for when time-specific data granularity is needed.

## Comprehensive DateTime Truncation

Now run the next code snippet for a comprehensive example of all `DATETRUNC` variations:

```sql
DECLARE @dt datetime2 = '2023-05-17T11:30:15.1234567' -- Wednesday
SELECT 'FullDateTime',          @dt                          UNION ALL
SELECT 'TruncateToMicrosecond', DATETRUNC(MICROSECOND, @dt)  UNION ALL
SELECT 'TruncateToMillisecond', DATETRUNC(MILLISECOND, @dt)  UNION ALL
SELECT 'TruncateToSecond',      DATETRUNC(SECOND, @dt)       UNION ALL
SELECT 'TruncateToMinute',      DATETRUNC(MINUTE, @dt)       UNION ALL
SELECT 'TruncateToHour',        DATETRUNC(HOUR, @dt)         UNION ALL
SELECT 'TruncateToDay',         DATETRUNC(DAY, @dt)          UNION ALL
SELECT 'TruncateToDayOfYear',   DATETRUNC(DAYOFYEAR, @dt)    UNION ALL
SELECT 'TruncateToIsoWeek',     DATETRUNC(ISO_WEEK, @dt)     UNION ALL	-- Week starts on Monday
SELECT 'TruncateToWeek',        DATETRUNC(WEEK, @dt)         UNION ALL	-- Week starts on Sunday by default; can override SET DATEFIRST
SELECT 'TruncateToMonth',       DATETRUNC(MONTH, @dt)        UNION ALL
SELECT 'TruncateToQuarter',     DATETRUNC(QUARTER, @dt)      UNION ALL
SELECT 'TruncateToYear',        DATETRUNC(YEAR, @dt)
```

This example demonstrates the capability of `DATETRUNC` to truncate dates and times across a broad spectrum of components, from microseconds to years, highlighting its versatility in data processing and analysis tasks.

Also note that, in the context of weeks, the function provides two options: `ISO_WEEK` and `WEEK`. Here's the distinction between them:

- **TruncateToIsoWeek**: Using the `ISO_WEEK` parameter with `DATETRUNC` truncates the datetime to the start of the ISO week, which is always Monday.

- **TruncateToWeek**: The `WEEK` parameter, on the other hand, truncates the datetime to the start of the week based on the SQL Server's default setting, which is usually Sunday in the United States. However, this starting day of the week can be altered using the `SET DATEFIRST` statement.

This distinction is important for accurately performing weekly data analysis and ensuring that the week boundaries align with the intended standard or operational definition of a week. In this case, our `@dt` parameter is set to 5/17/2023, which is a Wednesday. Thus, `ISO_WEEK` returns 5/15 (the prior Monday), while `WEEK` returns 5/14 (the prior Sunday).

## DATETRUNC and DATE_BUCKET Equivalence

Notably, `DATETRUNC` can achieve the same outcomes as `DATE_BUCKET` when the bucket size is set to one and the origin is the default January 1, 1900. For example, notice the equivalent output of the two columns in the following statement:

```sql
DECLARE @DateValue datetime2 = '2022-01-24T11:38:29'

SELECT
 Using_DATE_BUCKET  = DATE_BUCKET(day, 1, @DateValue),
 Using_DATETRUNC    = DATETRUNC(day, @DateValue)
```

Both statements return just the day portion of `@DateValue`, without the time portion.
