# STRING_SPLIT Function with Ordinal

SQL Server 2022 enhances the `STRING_SPLIT` function (first introduced in SQL Server 2016) by adding an "enable ordinal" parameter. This improvement addresses a common challenge faced when splitting strings and needing to preserve the original order of elements, which is beneficial in scenarios like data deduplication and bulk processing.

Start by pressing `CTRL+N` to open a new query window for this lab in SSMS. Then switch to the AdventureWorks2019 database:

```sql
USE AdventureWorks2019
```

## Basic Usage of STRING_SPLIT

**SQL Server 2016 and later:**

```sql
SELECT *
FROM STRING_SPLIT('Bravo/Alpha/Tango/Delta', '/')
```

This example demonstrates the basic functionality available since SQL Server 2016, splitting a string into rows without *necessarily* preserving the order of elements. While the order is often preserved with a small number of items, the order is not guaranteed in all cases.

**Enhancement in SQL Server 2022:**

```sql
SELECT *
FROM STRING_SPLIT('Bravo/Alpha/Tango/Delta', '/', 1)
```

The introduction of the ordinal parameter allows for the preservation of element order, by utilizing the value in the new `ordinal` column that gets returned when supplying the "enable ordinal" parameter as 1. Thus, even if the order of the rows returned does not match the order of the items supplied, the new `ordinal` column indicates the position of the item as supplied.

## Deduplicating Items While Preserving Order

Run this query to view the order of elements before deduplication:

```sql
SELECT
    value,
    ordinal
FROM
    STRING_SPLIT('Bravo/Alpha/Bravo/Tango/Delta/Bravo/Alpha/Delta', '/', 1)
```

By leveraging the `MIN(ordinal)` function in combination with `GROUP BY`, we can deduplicate the elements while maintaining their original sequence:

```sql
SELECT
    value,
    ordinal = MIN(ordinal)
FROM 
    STRING_SPLIT('Bravo/Alpha/Bravo/Tango/Delta/Bravo/Alpha/Delta', '/', 1)
GROUP BY
    value
ORDER BY
    ordinal
```

Here, `GROUP BY` deduplicates the resultset, while `MIN(ordinal)` ensures that the first occurrence of any duplicate item maintains its original position.

This next query shows how the `STRING_AGG` function can then be used to reconstruct the string from the deduplicated elements, while preserving their original order.

```sql
WITH SplitCte AS (
    SELECT
        value,
        ordinal = MIN(ordinal)
    FROM
        STRING_SPLIT('Bravo/Alpha/Bravo/Tango/Delta/Bravo/Alpha/Delta', '/', 1)
    GROUP BY
        value
)
SELECT
    Deduped = STRING_AGG(value, '/') WITHIN GROUP (ORDER BY ordinal)
FROM
    SplitCte
```

## Bulk Processing with Preserved Ordinal

In a scenario requiring bulk processing of rows identified by IDs supplied as a CSV string, preserving the original order of IDs is crucial for correlating results.

**Example with AdventureWorks2019:**

First, note the three rows in the `Person.Person` table with IDs 6, 12, and 18, for Jossef, Thierry, and John:

```sql
-- Here are three person rows with IDs 6, 12, and 18
SELECT BusinessEntityID, FirstName
FROM Person.Person
WHERE BusinessEntityID IN (6, 12, 18)
```

Next, let's perform a bulk operation on these three rows. We'll use a `SELECT` in this case, but it could also be a bulk DML operation like `UPDATE`, `DELETE`, or `MERGE`, with an `OUTPUT` clause that returns results about the bulk update.

```sql
-- Bulk processing with preserved order
DECLARE @BusinessEntityIDs varchar(max) = '6,12,18'

;WITH BusinessEntityIDsCte AS (
    SELECT
        CONVERT(int, value) AS BusinessEntityID,
        ordinal
    FROM
        STRING_SPLIT(@BusinessEntityIDs, ',', 1)
)
SELECT
    ids.Ordinal,    -- Use ordinal for original sequence correlation
    p.FirstName,
    p.LastName,
    e.JobTitle
FROM
    Person.Person AS p
    INNER JOIN HumanResources.Employee AS e ON e.BusinessEntityID = p.BusinessEntityID
    INNER JOIN BusinessEntityIDsCte AS ids ON ids.BusinessEntityID = p.BusinessEntityID
ORDER BY
    LastName
```

This example underscores the utility of the enhanced `STRING_SPLIT` function in SQL Server 2022, for preserving order when splitting strings. Although the results are returned in a different order than the supplied IDs, they include an `Ordinal` column that correlates to the original order.

___

[Lab: T-SQL Enhancements - GENERATE_SERIES ▶](https://github.com/lennilobel/sql2022-workshop-hol/blob/main/HOL/1.%20T-SQL%20Enhancements/5.%20GENERATE_SERIES.md)