# IS [NOT] DISTINCT FROM Comparison Operator

SQL Server 2022 introduces `IS [NOT] DISTINCT FROM`, an enhancement in T-SQL syntax that simplifies comparisons, including handling NULL values in comparisons, which traditionally require additional logic.

Start by pressing `CTRL+N` to open a new query window for this lab in SSMS. Then switch to the AdventureWorks2019 database:

```sql
USE AdventureWorks2019
```

## Simplifying NULL Comparisons

Traditionally, comparing values in SQL, especially when NULLs are involved, can be cumbersome and unintuitive. The standard `!=` or `=` operators do not include NULLs in their comparison, necessitating additional conditions for NULL handling.

Let's start exploring this new capability by creating the `Sample` table, and populating it five rows of data:

```sql
CREATE TABLE Sample (
    Id int IDENTITY PRIMARY KEY,
    Value int,
    Message nvarchar(50)
)

INSERT INTO Sample
 (Value,  Message)  VALUES
 (NULL,  'hello'),
 (10,    NULL),
 (17,    'abc'),
 (17,    'yes'),
 (NULL,  NULL)
```

Focus on the `Value` column. Observe that one row has a `Value` of 10, two rows have a `Value` of 17, and two rows have a `Value` of NULL.

Now let's query on that `Value` column:

```sql
SELECT * FROM Sample WHERE Value != 17                        -- Ignores NULLs
SELECT * FROM Sample WHERE Value != 17 OR Value IS NULL       -- Includes NULLs but requires additional condition
SELECT * FROM Sample WHERE Value != 17 OR Value = NULL        -- Using = with NULL doesn't work
```

Notice how `Value != 17` doesn't return NULLs, requiring an additional `OR VALUE IS NULL` check, and how `Value = NULL` also doesn't work.

The new `IS DISTINCT FROM` syntax offers a more intuitive approach:

```sql
SELECT * FROM Sample WHERE Value IS DISTINCT FROM 17          -- Like != but includes NULLs
```

Now cleanup by deleting the `Sample` table:

```sql
DROP TABLE Sample
```


## Usage in Data Retrieval

In this demo, we're using the `Sales.Orders` table in the WideWorldImporters database to illustrate the benefits of the `IS NOT DISTINCT FROM` T-SQL feature in SQL Server 2022, which is particularly useful for handling NULL values in queries.

```sql
USE WideWorldImporters

SELECT * FROM Sales.Orders
```

Scroll the results a bit to the right to observe that the `Sales.Orders` table includes a `PickingCompletedWhen` column, documenting the datetime an order's picking was completed. Notably, out of 73,595 rows, 3,085 contain NULL values in this column:

```
SELECT COUNT(*) FROM Sales.Orders
SELECT COUNT(*) FROM Sales.Orders WHERE PickingCompletedWhen IS NULL
```

Start by creating a non-clustered index on the `PickingCompletedWhen` column. This index improves the performance of queries that use this column, ideally using an index seek and not an index scan. Index scans are less efficient because they require SQL Server to examine every row in the index to find matches, as opposed to index seeks, which efficiently navigate the index to find the starting point of the desired data. 

```sql
-- Create an index on the picking completion date
CREATE NONCLUSTERED INDEX IDX_Orders_PickingCompletedWhen ON Sales.Orders (PickingCompletedWhen)
```

Now enable the actual execution plan in SQL Server Management Studio (SSMS) to monitor SQL Server's query execution strategy. This can be done from the Query menu or by pressing `Ctrl+M`. Observing the execution plan will let you confirm the use of an index seek in queries.

Next, we execute a parameterized query to identify all orders for a specified picking completion date. We expect to see 35 rows retrieved.

```sql
-- Find all the orders for a specific picking completion date (should yield 35 rows using an index seek)
DECLARE @dt datetime2 = '2013-01-01 12:00:00.0000000'

SELECT * FROM Sales.Orders
WHERE PickingCompletedWhen = @dt
```

Check the execution plan to verify that an index seek was used for the query.

Attempting to find orders without a picking completion date by setting `@dt` to NULL and utilizing the `=` operator returns 0 rows, rather than the 3,085 rows with NULL values.

```sql
-- Using =, we get 0 rows when @dt is NULL, even though there are 3085 rows with a NULL value
DECLARE @dt datetime2 = NULL

SELECT * FROM Sales.Orders
WHERE PickingCompletedWhen = @dt
```

### Using ISNULL and a Predetermined Value

One common hack is to use `ISNULL` to convert NULLs into a predetermined value, which allows the query to accommodate both NULL and non-NULL values. The following two queries are identical, and correctly handle cases where the `@dt` parameter either has a value or is set to NULL. However, this method detracts from code readability:

```sql
-- Use ISNULL with predetermined value for comparing both non-NULL and NULL values (works, but requires an index scan)
DECLARE @dt datetime2

SET @dt = '2013-01-01 12:00:00.0000000'
SELECT * FROM Sales.Orders
WHERE ISNULL(PickingCompletedWhen, '9999-12-31 23:59:59.9999999') = ISNULL(@dt, '9999-12-31 23:59:59.9999999')


SET @dt = NULL
SELECT * FROM Sales.Orders
WHERE ISNULL(PickingCompletedWhen, '9999-12-31 23:59:59.9999999') = ISNULL(@dt, '9999-12-31 23:59:59.9999999')
```

Furthermore, having a look at the execution plan, you can see that this hack also results in an index scan.

### Testing for Both Conditions

Another workaround is to check for NULL and use either `PickingCompletedWhen = @dt` or `PickingCompletedWhen IS NULL` in the `WHERE` clause. This code checks for those two separate conditions: one that matches the column value with the variable `@dt` when it is not NULL, and another that specifically checks for NULL values in both the variable and the column and uses `IS NULL`:

```sql
-- Use IS NULL in addition to = for comparing both non-NULL and NULL values (works, but requires an index scan)
DECLARE @dt datetime2

SET @dt = '2013-01-01 12:00:00.0000000'
SELECT * FROM Sales.Orders
WHERE
    (@dt IS NOT NULL AND PickingCompletedWhen = @dt) OR
    (@dt IS NULL AND PickingCompletedWhen IS NULL)

SET @dt = NULL
SELECT * FROM Sales.Orders
WHERE
    (@dt IS NOT NULL AND PickingCompletedWhen = @dt) OR
    (@dt IS NULL AND PickingCompletedWhen IS NULL)
```

 Although this works and ensures that all expected rows are returned, it still leads to an index scan instead of an index seek. Confirm this by having another look at the execution plan.

### Using IS [NOT] DISTINCT FROM

Using SQL Server 2022's `IS NOT DISTINCT FROM` operator addresses both NULL and non-NULL values while maintaining efficient index seeks:

```sql
-- Use IS NOT DISTINCT FROM (works for both NULL and non-NULL checks, using an index seek)
DECLARE @dt datetime2

SET @dt = '2013-01-01 12:00:00.0000000'
SELECT * FROM Sales.Orders
WHERE PickingCompletedWhen IS NOT DISTINCT FROM @dt

SET @dt = NULL
SELECT * FROM Sales.Orders
WHERE PickingCompletedWhen IS NOT DISTINCT FROM @dt
```

After running each query, examine the execution plan to determine whether SQL Server utilized an index seek or scan. 

### Cleanup

To cleanup, remove the index we created for this demonstration:

```sql
DROP INDEX Sales.Orders.IDX_Orders_PickingCompletedWhen
```

This demonstration highlights the `IS NOT DISTINCT FROM` operator's ability to simplify SQL queries involving NULLs, promoting both code clarity and efficient query execution.

___

[Lab: T-SQL Enhancements - Windowing Enhancements ▶](https://github.com/lennilobel/sql2022-workshop-hol/blob/main/HOL/1.%20T-SQL%20Enhancements/8.%20Windowing%20enhancements.md)