# Introducing Row Level Security

Row-Level Security (RLS) in SQL Server enables you to control access to rows in a database table based on the characteristics of the user executing a query, such as their identity or membership in a specific role. Our exploration of RLS will unfold across three hands-on labs: the first introduces a basic, read-only security policy to familiarize you with RLS concepts; the second advances to a more advanced, updateable security policy using a shared database connection; and the third lab extends the application of RLS into a C# client application, showcasing how to integrate RLS with application-level security measures.

## Row Ownership Scenario

Before diving into the technical implementation, let's understand the concept of ownership in the context of a `Sales` table. This table contains sales data, where each record (or row) is associated with a specific sales user through a column named `SalesUsername`. The goal of our exercise is to ensure that each sales user can access only the rows that belong to them—effectively, the rows they "own."

To broaden access control, we introduce a special manager user capable of accessing all rows, regardless of ownership. This setup provides a practical scenario to explore Row-Level Security (RLS) features in SQL Server, which allows us to implement such ownership-based access control directly at the database level.

This lab shows how to use filter predicates in RLS to enable sales users to have read-only access to just their data, while a manager user can read and write all data.

## Create and Populate the Sales Table

First, we'll create the table and populate it with some initial data:

```sql
-- Create the sales data table
CREATE TABLE Sales(
    OrderID int,
    SalesUsername varchar(50),
    Product varchar(10),
    Qty int
)

-- Populate the table with 6 rows of data, 3 for SalesUser1 and 3 for SalesUser2
INSERT Sales VALUES 
    (1, 'SalesUser1', 'Valve', 5), 
    (2, 'SalesUser1', 'Wheel', 2), 
    (3, 'SalesUser1', 'Valve', 4),
    (4, 'SalesUser2', 'Bracket', 2), 
    (5, 'SalesUser2', 'Wheel', 5), 
    (6, 'SalesUser2', 'Seat', 5)

-- View the 6 rows in the table
SELECT * FROM Sales
```

This sets the stage for our demo by creating a sample dataset. It's a straightforward scenario introducing the concept of "filter" predicates in RLS, aiming to grant read-only access to sales users for rows they own.

## Create Users and Grant Permissions

Next, we'll create database users for our sales users and the manager, assigning the appropriate permissions:

```sql
-- Create the manager user and two sales users
CREATE USER ManagerUser WITHOUT LOGIN
CREATE USER SalesUser1 WITHOUT LOGIN
CREATE USER SalesUser2 WITHOUT LOGIN

-- Grant full access to the manager user, and read-only access to the sales users
GRANT SELECT, INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE ON Sales TO ManagerUser
GRANT SELECT ON Sales TO SalesUser1
GRANT SELECT ON Sales TO SalesUser2
GO
```

This configuration demonstrates the initial permissions setup, where sales users are restricted to read-only access, while the manager has full access to perform any operations on the Sales table.

## Configure Row-Level Security

Configuring RLS is a two-step process. First you create a predicate function, and then you create a security policy.

### Step 1. Create the Predicate Function

This involves creating a predicate function that SQL Server will use to determine row access:

```sql
CREATE FUNCTION SalesUserPredicate(@Username AS varchar(50))
    RETURNS TABLE
    WITH SCHEMABINDING
AS
    RETURN
        SELECT
            1 AS result 
        WHERE
            DATABASE_PRINCIPAL_ID() = DATABASE_PRINCIPAL_ID(@Username) OR
            DATABASE_PRINCIPAL_ID() = DATABASE_PRINCIPAL_ID('ManagerUser')
```

This inline table-valued function (TVF) is the core of our RLS implementation. It determines if a row should be accessible based on the user's database principal ID, allowing access to their rows and granting the manager unrestricted access. Here's how it works:

- The function takes a parameter `@Username` and returns a table with a single column `result` containing the value 1 when the WHERE clause conditions are met.
- The WHERE clause employs the `DATABASE_PRINCIPAL_ID()` function in two ways. When called without a parameter, it returns the database principal ID of the user executing the query. When called with a username as a parameter, it returns the database principal ID for that specific username.
- The logic "DATABASE_PRINCIPAL_ID() = DATABASE_PRINCIPAL_ID(@Username)" checks if the executing user's ID matches the ID of the user specified by the `@Username` parameter (effectively, the owner of the row).
- The "OR DATABASE_PRINCIPAL_ID() = DATABASE_PRINCIPAL_ID('ManagerUser')" part ensures that if the executing user is the manager, the condition is also satisfied, allowing access to any row.
- This dual condition in the WHERE clause effectively creates a logical OR gate: if either condition is true, the result is true. For sales users, this means access is granted only to rows they own.



The SELECT statement within the predicate function is crafted to return a scalar resultset with a single column value of 1 if the WHERE clause evaluates to true. This effectively conveys a "Boolean" result, signifying access is permitted to a given row. If the WHERE clause evaluates to false, no resultset is returned, indicating access should not be granted to that row.

This approach, although it conveys a Boolean result, is implemented via a table-valued function to enhance performance. Internally, SQL Server performs an INNER JOIN between this TVF and the Sales table. This operation filters out all the rows that do not satisfy the predicate function's criteria, effectively applying the row-level security based on the user's access rights. By leveraging this method, SQL Server can efficiently enforce access control rules.

### Step 2. Create and Enable the Security Policy

Now we can bind our predicate function to the Sales table with a security policy:

```sql
CREATE SECURITY POLICY SalesUserPolicy
    ADD FILTER PREDICATE dbo.SalesUserPredicate(SalesUsername) 
    ON dbo.Sales
    WITH (STATE = ON)
```

By creating and enabling this security policy, we effectively apply our RLS configuration, ensuring that sales users can access only their data, while the manager can access all data. This completes the setup for our read-only sales policy, illustrating how RLS can be used to enforce data visibility rules at the row level based on user ownership.

## Test RLS on the `Sales` table

Now let's test the Row-Level Security (RLS) implementation to ensure that the security policies work as intended. Here’s how the testing phase unfolds, demonstrating RLS in action.

### Initial State as `dbo`

Attempting to access the `Sales` table while logged in as the user `dbo` results in no rows being returned. This outcome is expected because RLS is in effect, and the `dbo` user does not match any `SalesUsername` in the table nor is it the manager. The queries and their implications are:

```sql
SELECT * FROM Sales
SELECT COUNT(*) FROM Sales
```

This yields 0 rows, confirming that RLS is correctly restricting access based on user context.

### Impersonating SalesUser1

By impersonating `SalesUser1`, we can simulate the view of the sales table from their perspective:

```sql
EXECUTE AS USER = 'SalesUser1'
SELECT * FROM Sales
SELECT COUNT(*) FROM Sales
REVERT
```

This results in visibility to exactly three rows - those owned by `SalesUser1`. This demonstrates the RLS filter in action, providing access only to rows that `SalesUser1` "owns".

### Impersonating SalesUser2

Switching the impersonation to `SalesUser2`:

```sql
EXECUTE AS USER = 'SalesUser2'
SELECT * FROM Sales
SELECT COUNT(*) FROM Sales
REVERT
```

Now, the view changes to the other three rows owned by `SalesUser2`, again underscoring the effectiveness of RLS in segregating data access at the row level.

### Impersonating ManagerUser

When impersonating `ManagerUser`:

```sql
EXECUTE AS USER = 'ManagerUser'
SELECT * FROM Sales
SELECT COUNT(*) FROM Sales
```

All six rows are visible, as the manager has unrestricted access to the entire table. This matches our expectations based on the predicate function logic.

### Attempting Data Modification as SalesUser1

An attempt to insert data as `SalesUser1`:

```sql
EXECUTE AS USER = 'SalesUser1'
INSERT Sales VALUES (7, 'SalesUser1', 'Valve', 2)
REVERT
```

This action fails, not due to RLS, but because `SalesUser1` lacks INSERT permission. This highlights the separation of concerns between access control (managed by RLS) and permission management in SQL Server.

### Data Modification by ManagerUser

The manager, however, can perform data modifications:

```sql
EXECUTE AS USER = 'ManagerUser'
INSERT Sales VALUES (7, 'SalesUser2', 'Valve', 1)  -- Adds a new item for SalesUser2.
UPDATE Sales SET Product = 'Screw' WHERE OrderId = 3  -- Changes the product name for an order owned by SalesUser1.
UPDATE Sales SET SalesUsername = 'SalesUser1' WHERE SalesUsername = 'SalesUser2' AND Qty > 3 -- Transfers high quantity orders from SalesUser2 to SalesUser1.
DELETE Sales WHERE OrderId = 2 -- Removes an incorrect order for SalesUser1.
REVERT
```

These changes demonstrate the manager's ability to insert, update, and delete records across the table, affecting the data visible to both sales users.

### Data Modifications Observed by SalesUser1

After the manager's modifications:

```sql
EXECUTE AS USER = 'SalesUser1'
SELECT * FROM Sales
SELECT COUNT(*) FROM Sales
REVERT
```

SalesUser1 now sees four rows, reflecting the deletion, product change, and the transfer of orders from SalesUser2.

### Data Modifications Observed by SalesUser2

```sql
EXECUTE AS USER = 'SalesUser2'
SELECT * FROM Sales
SELECT COUNT(*) FROM Sales
REVERT
```

SalesUser2 sees two rows, including the new order added by the manager but missing the transferred high quantity orders.

These tests validate the RLS setup, showing how it dynamically adjusts data visibility and access permissions based on the user context and the defined security policies.

## Disabling and Re-enabling the Security Policy

Permissioned users (like `dbo`) can disable and enable the RLS security policy at will.

### Disabling the Security Policy

To temporarily remove RLS restrictions and allow all users to see all rows in the `Sales` table, you can disable the security policy. This might be necessary for administrative tasks, bulk data operations, or troubleshooting. Here's how to do it:

```sql
-- Disable the security policy
ALTER SECURITY POLICY sec.SalesUserPolicy WITH (STATE = OFF)
```

Once the policy is disabled, a query against the `Sales` table, regardless of the user, will return all rows. This demonstrates the immediate effect of disabling RLS, effectively ignoring any row-level security rules previously in effect:

```sql
-- Query to see all rows in the table
SELECT * FROM Sales
```

### Re-enabling the Security Policy

After performing the necessary operations with the security policy disabled, you can re-enable it to restore row-level security controls. This ensures that the original data access restrictions are back in place, safeguarding data integrity and privacy:

```sql
-- Re-enable the security policy
ALTER SECURITY POLICY sec.SalesUserPolicy WITH (STATE = ON)
```

Following the re-enabling of the security policy, attempting the same `SELECT` query will adhere to the RLS rules, restricting row visibility based on the current user's permissions and the policy's definitions:

```sql
-- Query to test RLS is active again
SELECT * FROM Sales
```

Running as `dbo`, you'll observe that the query once again returns no rows, according to the re-activated RLS policy.

## Cleanup Process

Finally, cleaning up the database objects created during this demo is a straightforward process, involving dropping the security policy, predicate function, users, and the table. This cleanup ensures that the database environment is reset and ready for the next part of the demo or other activities.

```sql
-- Cleanup commands
DROP SECURITY POLICY sec.SalesUserPolicy
DROP FUNCTION SalesUserPredicate
DROP USER IF EXISTS ManagerUser
DROP USER IF EXISTS SalesUser1
DROP USER IF EXISTS SalesUser2
DROP TABLE IF EXISTS Sales
```

This cleanup step is essential for maintaining a tidy database environment and effectively concludes the first part of our demonstration on using Row-Level Security in SQL Server. The steps outlined not only illustrate the practical application of RLS but also provide a clear blueprint for testing and verifying its effectiveness in controlling access to data at the row level.

[Next Lab ▶](https://github.com/lennilobel/sql2022-workshop-hol/blob/main/HOL/3.%20Security%20Features/3.%20Row%20Level%20Security/2.%20Updateable%20RLS%20Policy%20on%20Shared%20Connection.md)
