# Updateable RLS Policy with Shared Connection

Now let's address two limitations of the scenario in previous lab, which was readonly for sales users, and required creating a database user for each person.

In this lab, we enable sales users to not only view but also to modify rows they own, including inserting, updating, and deleting operations, while ensuring these modifications adhere to ownership rules. To accomplish this, we'll utilize block predicates alongside our existing predicate function, creating a comprehensive RLS policy that safeguards against unauthorized changes.

Furthermore, instead of creating individual database users for each salesperson—which was a key part of our identification process in part one—we'll employ an alternative method to distinguish users. This shift is necessary because we will be using a shared database account for all users, making `DATABASE_USER_ID()` ineffective for individual user identification. This approach reflects a more scalable model, especially in scenarios where individual database accounts per user are impractical or undesirable (this very often includes global and n-tier applications).

## Create and Populate the Sales table

Setting up for this demo, which builds upon the setup used in the previous demo, involves creating the same `Sales` table and populating it with sample data. Here’s how you can get everything ready:

1. **Create the Sales Table:** First, create a `Sales` table to store sales data, including an `OrderID`, the `SalesUsername` associated with each sale, the `Product` sold, and the quantity (`Qty`) of each product.

```sql
CREATE TABLE Sales(
    OrderID int,
    SalesUsername varchar(50),
    Product varchar(10),
    Qty int
)
```

2. **Populate the Sales Table:** Then, insert six rows of sample data into the `Sales` table. This dataset represents sales records for two users, `SalesUser1` and `SalesUser2`, with each user associated with three sales entries.

```sql
INSERT Sales VALUES 
    (1, 'SalesUser1', 'Valve', 5), 
    (2, 'SalesUser1', 'Wheel', 2), 
    (3, 'SalesUser1', 'Valve', 4),
    (4, 'SalesUser2', 'Bracket', 2), 
    (5, 'SalesUser2', 'Wheel', 5), 
    (6, 'SalesUser2', 'Seat', 5)
```

3. **View the Sample Data:** Finally, to confirm that the data is correctly inserted and to view the current state of the `Sales` table, you can execute a SELECT statement.

```sql
SELECT * FROM Sales
```

This setup mirrors the initial configuration from the previous demo but serves as the foundation for demonstrating advanced Row-Level Security (RLS) features in this demo, focusing on block predicates and utilizing `SESSION_CONTEXT` for user identification in a shared database user scenario.

## Create the Shared Database User

The next step is setting up a shared database user environment. This involves creating a single database user, `AppUser`, which will be linked to a single server login, `AppLogin`. This shared user setup is for scenarios where multiple end-users are authenticated at the application layer rather than directly at the database level. Here's how you can set it up:

### Create the Server Login

First, create a server login named `AppLogin`. This login acts as the authentication mechanism at the SQL Server level.

```sql
CREATE LOGIN AppLogin WITH PASSWORD = 'StrongP@$$w0rd'
```

### Create the Database User

Next, associate this login with a new database user, `AppUser`, within your target database. This user will be used for all connections made by the application on behalf of authenticated users.

```sql
CREATE USER AppUser FOR LOGIN AppLogin
```

### Grant Necessary Permissions

Grant full access on the `Sales` table to the shared user account `AppUser`:

```sql
GRANT SELECT, INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE ON Sales TO AppUser
```

This ensures that `AppUser` has the necessary permissions to perform select, insert, update, and delete operations on the `Sales` table, with row-level access determined by your RLS policies.

## Create the Predicate Function

The creation of the predicate function for the second Row-Level Security (RLS) demo involves a nuanced approach to ensure that data access control adheres to the application's user authentication and authorization model. Here's the SQL code to create the predicate function:

```sql
-- Create the predicate function
CREATE FUNCTION SalesUserPredicate(@Username varchar(max))
    RETURNS TABLE
    WITH SCHEMABINDING
AS
    RETURN
        -- Return 1 only if the connection username matches "AppUser", and if the AppUsername
        -- passed in from the application via SESSION_CONTEXT matches the @Username
        -- parameter which will get bound to the AppUsername column of the Sales table. The
        -- only exception is ManageUser, who bypasses RLS completely

        SELECT
            1 AS result
        WHERE
            DATABASE_PRINCIPAL_ID() = DATABASE_PRINCIPAL_ID('AppUser') AND (
                CONVERT(varchar, SESSION_CONTEXT(N'AppUsername')) = @Username OR
                CONVERT(varchar, SESSION_CONTEXT(N'AppUsername')) = 'ManagerUser')
```

In this code, note the following:

1. **Inline Table-Valued Function (TVF):** This function, like in the previous demo, is an inline TVF that accepts a `@Username` parameter. This parameter is intended to be matched against the `SalesUsername` column of the `Sales` table when defining the security policy. This approach allows for a straightforward, efficient query plan that integrates seamlessly with RLS.

2. **Use of `DATABASE_PRINCIPAL_ID`:** The function utilizes the `DATABASE_PRINCIPAL_ID` function, but with a significant distinction from the previous demo. Here, it's specifically hardcoded to check for `AppUser`, the shared database account used by all application connections. This ensures the function is only active for users authenticated through the application, leveraging `AppUser` for database interactions.

3. **Session Context for User Identification:** Differing from the previous demo, which used `DATABASE_PRINCIPAL_ID` for user identification, this function relies on `SESSION_CONTEXT` to identify the specific user authenticated by the application. The application is responsible for setting the username in the session context under the key `AppUsername` upon connecting to the database. `SESSION_CONTEXT` acts as a server-side, memory-resident key-value store, persisting only for the duration of the database connection. The values within this "dictionary" are of type `SqlVariant`, necessitating the use of `CONVERT` to cast the username to a varchar string for comparison.

4. **Logic in the  WHERE Clause:** The function's logic ensures that data access is controlled tightly through a combination of authentication verification (via `DATABASE_PRINCIPAL_ID`) and ownership or role-based access control (leveraging `SESSION_CONTEXT`). The use of `AND` combined with parentheses in the WHERE clause effectively narrows down access: firstly, confirming that the user is authenticated through `AppUser`, and subsequently, ensuring the user either owns the row in question or is the manager user, who is exempt from RLS restrictions.

This predicate function is a key component in implementing RLS in scenarios where application users share a single database user account. It cleverly combines SQL Server's security features with application-level user session management to ensure data access is both secure and appropriate to each user's permissions.


## Create the Security Policy

To finalize the setup of our Row-Level Security (RLS) implementation for this demo, we'll create a security policy that incorporates both filter and block predicates:

```sql
-- Create and enable a security policy that adds the function as a filter predicate and a
-- two block predicates on the table. Only AFTER INSERT and AFTER UPDATE block predicates
-- are needed, because BEFORE UPDATE and BEFORE DELETE are already blocked by the filter
-- predicate.
CREATE SECURITY POLICY SalesUserPolicy
    ADD FILTER PREDICATE dbo.SalesUserPredicate(SalesUsername) ON dbo.Sales,
    ADD BLOCK PREDICATE dbo.SalesUserPredicate(SalesUsername) ON dbo.Sales AFTER INSERT,
    ADD BLOCK PREDICATE dbo.SalesUserPredicate(SalesUsername) ON dbo.Sales AFTER UPDATE
    WITH (STATE = ON)
```

Here's an explanation of the security policy:

1. **Filter Predicate on Sales Table:** The policy includes a filter predicate that applies to the `SalesUsername` column of the `Sales` table, linking it to the `@Username` parameter expected by the predicate function. This predicate serves to filter rows for `SELECT` statements and inherently for `UPDATE` and `DELETE` statements as well. The logic here is straightforward: if a user cannot select (view) a row due to the filter predicate, they inherently cannot update or delete it.

2. **Block Predicates for AFTER INSERT and AFTER UPDATE:** In addition to the filter predicate, the policy includes two block predicates, one each for `AFTER INSERT` and `AFTER UPDATE` operations. These block predicates use the same column mapping and predicate function as the filter predicate, reinforcing row ownership rules during insert and update transactions. Essentially, they ensure that a user can insert new rows or update existing rows only if such actions do not violate the established ownership rules encoded in the predicate function.

3. **Absence of BEFORE UPDATE and BEFORE DELETE Predicates:** The policy does not include block predicates for `BEFORE UPDATE` and `BEFORE DELETE` operations. This is based on the understanding that the filter predicate already prevents users from updating or deleting rows they cannot select. And so we are relying on the filter predicate to implicitly block unauthorized updates and deletions.

   However, these two block predicates are useful in scenarios where you have no filter predicate. For example, consider a hospital database where all users need to select all patient records, but modifications are restricted to records of patients in the same ward as the user. In such a case, a filter predicate would not be used (allowing all users to select all records), but `BEFORE UPDATE` and `BEFORE DELETE` block predicates would be crucial to ensure users can only modify records within their ward.

## Test the RLS Policy

   Testing the Row-Level Security (RLS) policy in this setup involves several steps that simulate the application's behavior in managing user sessions and accessing the database. Let's walk through the testing process:

### Execute as `AppUser`

First, we need to execute as `AppUser`, the shared database user account, to simulate a connection coming from the application. This step is crucial because our security policy's predicate function uses `DATABASE_PRINCIPAL_ID` to ensure that connections are made using this shared user.

```sql
EXECUTE AS USER = 'AppUser'
```

### Test SalesUser1 Access

Next, we simulate the application's middle-tier behavior of setting the session context to identify the authenticated user. In this case, we're testing as if `SalesUser1` is the authenticated user. The `sp_set_session_context` stored procedure allows us to set a session-level key-value pair, which our predicate function will use to determine data access permissions.

```sql
EXEC sp_set_session_context @key = N'AppUsername', @value = 'SalesUser1';
```

With the session context set, we proceed to query the `Sales` table. This mimics the action of `SalesUser1` attempting to access sales records.

```sql
SELECT * FROM Sales;
SELECT COUNT(*) FROM Sales;
```
Observations:
- The RLS policy should filter the rows and return only those belonging to `SalesUser1`, as determined by the session context. This results in seeing just the three rows associated with `SalesUser1`.
- The `SELECT COUNT(*) FROM Sales` query confirms the number of rows visible to `SalesUser1` under the RLS policy, which should be three, matching the number of sales records associated with `SalesUser1`.
     
### Test SalesUser2 Access

Now set the session context's `AppUsername` to 'SalesUser2', essentially impersonating SalesUser2 for this session.

```sql
-- As AppUser with AppUsername 'SalesUser2', we get just the rows we own
EXEC sp_set_session_context @key = N'AppUsername', @value = 'SalesUser2'
SELECT * FROM Sales
SELECT COUNT(*) FROM Sales
```

Now the `Sales` table rows is showing just the other three rows, specifically owned by SalesUser2.

### Test the Block Predicates

Unlike the previous lab which was a readonly scenario, this lab uses block predicates to allow restricted access for updates as well. We are still impersonating `SalesUser2`, and so we should be able to update our own data but not data belonging to other users.

```sql
-- We can insert new rows for ourselves
INSERT INTO Sales VALUES (7, 'SalesUser2', 'Seat', 12)
SELECT * FROM Sales
SELECT COUNT(*) FROM Sales
```

By inserting a new row with 'SalesUser2' as the `SalesUsername`, the operation succeeds because it aligns with the session context's current `AppUsername`, 'SalesUser2'. This addition is permissible under the security policy due to the AFTER INSERT block predicate, which doesn't block inserts that adhere to ownership rules defined by the session context. Consequently, the table now visibly contains four rows for SalesUser2, confirming the insert's success.

Attempting to insert a row for another user, however, demonstrates the block predicates' enforcement:

```sql
-- But we can't insert new rows for other users
INSERT INTO Sales VALUES (8, 'SalesUser1', 'Table', 8)
```

This insert operation fails because it attempts to add a row for 'SalesUser1' while the session is still under the `AppUsername` 'SalesUser2'. The AFTER INSERT block predicate prevents this by enforcing that inserts must only be for rows that the session's `AppUsername` owns.

Similarly, updates are restricted when it comes to changing ownership of a row:

```sql
-- And we can't transfer rows we own to other users
UPDATE Sales SET SalesUsername = 'SalesUser1' WHERE OrderId = 5
```

This update attempt fails due to the AFTER UPDATE block predicate. While SalesUser2 initially owns OrderId 5 and could normally update its details, changing its `SalesUsername` to 'SalesUser1' attempts to transfer ownership. Such an operation is blocked by the predicate, demonstrating that while users can update rows they own, they cannot alter the fundamental ownership, aligning with the security policy's restrictions.



### Test ManagerUser Access

Now let's impersonate the manager:

```sql
-- As AppUser with AppUsername 'ManagerUser', RLS is effectively bypassed
EXEC sp_set_session_context @key = N'AppUsername', @value = 'ManagerUser', @read_only = 1
```

Note that this time, we are setting the session context `AppUsername` to 'ManagerUser' with the `@read_only` parameter as `1`, which locks this value for the duration of the database connection. This precaution ensures that the session context, once set by the client application where the user was authenticated, cannot be altered by any subsequent T-SQL commands in the same session. Although we've dynamically changed `AppUsername` values in our demo to illustrate different user perspectives, in a real-world application, it's critical to lock the session context to prevent potential security breaches, where malicious code could attempt to impersonate another user by altering the session context.

The manager's role is designed to bypass the restrictions imposed by RLS, as demonstrated in the predicate function. This capability allows the manager to view and manipulate data across all sales users:

```sql
-- Manager can see all
SELECT * FROM Sales
SELECT COUNT(*) FROM Sales
```

The manager can also insert new rows for any user and change the ownership of existing rows:

```sql
-- Manager can insert new rows for any user
INSERT INTO Sales VALUES (8, 'SalesUser1', 'Table', 2)
INSERT INTO Sales VALUES (9, 'SalesUser2', 'Lamp', 4)

-- Manager can transfer rows across different users
UPDATE Sales SET SalesUsername = 'SalesUser1' WHERE OrderId = 5

-- View the changes
SELECT * FROM Sales
```

These actions, permitted by the design of our predicate function, underscore the manager's ability to operate across the entire dataset without the constraints that apply to regular sales users.

Attempting to change the `AppUsername` after it has been set as read-only will fail:

```sql
-- AppUsername in session context cannot be changed because it was set with the read_only option
EXEC sp_set_session_context @key = N'AppUsername', @value = 'SalesUser1'
```

This attempt to switch the session context to impersonate `SalesUser1` does not succeed because the session context has been locked to prevent such changes. This feature is crucial for ensuring that the integrity and security of the user session are maintained throughout the connection's lifecycle, safeguarding against unauthorized attempts to circumvent RLS policies.

[Next Lab ▶](https://github.com/lennilobel/sql2022-workshop-hol/blob/main/HOL/3.%20Security%20Features/3.%20Row%20Level%20Security/3.%20RLS%20Client%20Application.md)
